---
layout: story
title: "SB 1718: The nightmare on the way to the American Dream"
permalink: SB-1718-the-nightmare-on-the-way-to-the-american-dream
lede: Magna a ultrices dui phasellus** turpis proin taciti molestie parturient adipiscing fusce id pharetra lacus leo
thumbnail: assets/images/2/Amy (1).jpg
cover: assets/images/2/Amy (1).jpg
caption: Small business owner in Homestead (FL)
alt: Amy sitting in front of her house 
date: 2023-06-02 07:00:00 -0400
authors: Zanolee Grant, Diego Fernández, Jaime Armendáriz, Julien Carle and Juan Laso
lon: -80.47531
lat: 25.47232
zoom: 14
---

## Introduction

Since May 21, we have come to know Miami as a multicultural city, where immigrant communities make up 27% of the total population. Walking through the streets, the socioeconomic clash and the differences between social classes are clearly visible. Classism, elitism and racial segregation are observed in each and every neighborhood in Miami.

Neighborhoods such as Coconut Grove are a clear example of this social division, where people not only live together by nationality, but also by race. At the beginning of the street, the houses are small, one-story, where the humble nature of their owners predominates over the luxurious and extravagant. The pavement, visibly cracked, makes walking difficult. These conditions are also seen in the cemetery in the middle of the street, which has no protection other than a small fence of no more than 30 centimeters. This humility quickly gives way to luxury. The adjoining street is enclosed by a wooden fence that divides the African-American neighborhood from the Caucasian neighborhood. The streets in this new section enjoy noticeably better structural differences, such as nicely paved streets, houses with more than two stories on both sides, and with some higher-end cars than previously seen. 

## Amy:

During our time in Miami, we learned that a new law that targets immigrant communities was recently passed. We ventured south to learn more about this law, its expected impact, and long term consequences for those who will be directly affected. Senate Bill 1718 could trigger the repatriation of anyone who has failed to get their papers in order. It was passed by Republican Governor Ron DeSantis, and will go into effect on July 1st. According to Wendy, representative of the Florida Immigrant Coalition, this law will affect the most vulnerable communities, especially construction and agricultural workers. However, the havoc that this law will cause when it becomes effective can already be felt in these types of jobs. While in Homestead we spoke to a Jamaican fruit vendor who expressed, “Yesterday, a farmer came to us fruit vendors while we were picking up and he asked us if we would be willing to go work his farm for the day. None of his workers showed up.” When asked if any of the vendors went, she responded with a chuckle and said, “No.”

Although this fear and uncertainty can be felt throughout the immigrant community, people are not giving up hope without a fight and hoping to vindicate themselves in the process. A clear example of this resilience is embodied in Amy, a 25 year old Indigenous Guatemalan woman who has dedicated the last 7 years of her life to chasing the American dream. Amy and her family received us in their home in Homestead, located south of Miami. From the moment she reached in 2016 she has worked in various occupations, beginning with work in a plant nursery. Now, she is a small business owner who operates a food truck selling Guatemalan staples. She has a robust social media following, 200,000 and counting, where she promotes her business and documents her life in Homestead. From the moment we entered her, the family made us feel welcomed, offering us water, Powerade and mangos. As we got to know Amy we discovered that she walked from Guatemala to Mexico, a journey she laments to discuss. She now focuses on the future of her business, family, and completing her process of becoming an American citizen as she is on the pathway through political asylum. 

The most surprising turn of events occurred as we prepared to depart. Amy’s brother, Anibal, denounced the situation that immigrants are being forced to face as a result of SB1718: "We came here running from something bad to reach here and watch history repeat itself.” In fact, despite the harshness of what he experienced, he shared about the difficult journey he faced to enter the United States, “We had to walk 11 days through the desert, avoiding the guard that patrols the border. The last 4 days we had to survive without water or by drinking dirty stagnant water that we found on the way, something I would never do now”, he recalls. He also adds that "along the way, in addition to the risk of being deported, we constantly heard the sound of rattlesnakes and to sleep we rubbed ourselves with garlic to avoid being bitten." Aníbal, despite not suffering direct discrimination, explains that his wife, born in the United States of Salvadoran descent, came to receive words such as "what are you doing here? Go where you came from."

From our observations, within a family we find different, and completely opposite perspectives to face this new situation. While Amy looks forward to a bright future, awaiting her imminent naturalization, her brother contemplates a somewhat less hopeful future for the community. This is the point of divergence for this family, where the glass of water is half full for one, it remains half empty for the other. Nonetheless, their differing views do not get in the way of their support for each other- where it’s clear to see that family and hard work are the glue that holds them together as they navigate their paths to the American Dream. 

## Conclusion

Today, June 1, 2023, is the day of the general strike. Many establishments have closed their doors to support Miami's immigrant community, affected by the imminent implementation of SB 1718. But, above all, it is the day we meet Doña Marta in a park in the multicultural neighborhood of Allapattah.

Doña Marta is a 60-year-old Honduran woman who arrived in Miami in 1998 by a path that, as she assures us, she would not recommend to anyone. In her native Honduras she left, at that time, two children who until then had grown up without a father and now would have to do so without a mother. Behind each of her kind and humble gestures, despite having to wait for inexperienced students who arrived an hour later than expected, lies a story of overcoming and survival, which made her "look death in the face" in more than one situation. Despite her age, Doña Marta faces exhaustive schedules in her work as a cleaner, which allows her to have the basics to survive and financially support her grandchildren and children, who are also undocumented. Shortly after arriving, Doña 	Marta suffered the ravages of Hurricane Mitch, which caused her to obtain Temporary Protective Status (TPS).
To reach the United States, Doña Marta had to get on a boat. At a certain point, one of the boats ahead of her was hijacked, which caused panic among the crew of her boat. This caused an iron bar to pierce his right shin. She shows this by lifting up the leg of the jeans she wears under a pink blouse. 

Despite his refusal and his bad experience, his two sons also decided to take the dangerous migration journey in search of a better life. Time, however, would prove her right. Her son was the first to undertake the long and complicated journey. Coyotes - people who live near the border and help any immigrant who can afford it - beat him up and stole what little money he had on him. This forced him to jump on the well-known "train of death" and call his mother from there. This migration pathway caused, during 2022, 853 deaths, according to the Bureau of Customs and Border Protection. But her daughter's story is undoubtedly the most moving. When she was pregnant, she set out to join her mother on the other side of the border. However, things did not go as planned. Doña Marta recalls, visibly moved, the moment when she received a call about her daughter, seeking money in exchange for the mother's chance to see her daughter alive again. Three years later, after being repatriated to Honduras, she tried again, this time finding better luck and being reunited with her mother in the United States.

Despite her age, her wrinkles, her noticeable tiredness and her short stature -sixty meters tall-, Doña Marta reflects what every immigrant wants to do in this country: live a better life, escape the misery of her native country and raise her family, with hard work, humility and gentleness. 







<audio controls>
 <source src="assets/images/2/marta.mp3" type="audio/mp3">
</audio>

